Let us now learn about Virtual Services and Istio.
So, we now have the bookinfo.app Gateway.
End users who are coming to http://bookinfo.app will hit the Gateway.
But where to go from there?
How do we route traffic through this Gateway to our services?
There are many different services.
How can we specify that all traffic to the URL bookinfo.app
slash productPage should go to the productPage service?
The productPage service also serves static HTML/CSS
and JavaScript content at the path /static.
There is also a login, logout, and API path.
All of this should route to the product page.
All routing rules are configured through Virtual Services.
Virtual Services define a set of routing rules for traffic
coming from the Ingress Gateway into the Service Mesh.
Virtual Services are flexible and powerful,
with rich traffic routing options.
You can specify traffic behavior for one or more hostnames,
manage traffic within different versions of a service,
standard and regex paths are supported.
When a virtual service is created,
Istio control plane applies the new configuration
to all the Envoy sidecars.
So, let's create a Virtual Service to route these URLs
to the productPage service.
We create an object with the API version
set to the networking.istio.io/v1-alpha-3
as of this recording.
Note that this may change in later versions,
so always refer to the Istio documentation
while creating Virtual Services
to get the latest supported API version.
Kind is set to VirtualService,
metadata has name set to bookinfo,
and we have a spec section.
First, we want to say that
only traffic to the host bookinfo.app
hits this Virtual Service,
so we edit a host section.
There may be multiple gateways configured.
How do we associate this Virtual Service
to the Gateway we created for our app?
For that, we add a Gateway section
and specify the name of the Gateway we created.
That is, bookinfo-gateway.
And finally, we have the HTTP section
where we add our routing rules.
The match section specifies URIs
that should be matched.
These are the URIs that we just discussed.
Exact means the URI is matched as-is,
and prefix are the URIs that start
with the specified URI,
such as /static/something
or /api/v1/products/something.
All of the traffic matching these URI patterns
are then routed to the destination
specified in the route section.
So, we now have a Virtual Service
for product page.
All traffic coming in
through the bookinfo-gateway
with the host name bookinfo.app
now hits this Virtual Service.
Next, the product page needs to
talk to the review service.
At first, it only talks to the version 1.
And later, we bring in versions 2 and 3.
How do we gradually introduce
the other versions,
and only drive a small percentage
of traffic to it and test them
before driving all to it?
Let's first look at how this works
without Istio or Virtual Services
on a plain Kubernetes cluster.
So, in the beginning,
we have the product page service
talking to the reviews v1 service.
We then came up with
two new versions of the reviews service,
version 2 and version 3.
Version 2 has the black stars
and version 3 has the red stars.
We want to test these services
by driving a small percentage
of traffic to it until we are sure
they work as expected
and that our users like
the new star feature.
In the plain Kubernetes world,
without Istio or a service mesh,
we would deploy the reviews microservice
as a deployment.
Let's say it has three replicas,
for example.
This microservice is exposed
within the cluster
using a service type of ClusterIP.
The labels app is set
to the value of reviews,
and that helps the service
identify the pods
as part of the reviews deployment.
The service directs traffic
to all the three Pods.
The product page can now
refer to the reviews service
to get reviews of a book.
As of now,
100% of traffic
goes to the reviews v1.
When we deploy a new version
of the reviews service,
say version 2,
we create it as a new deployment.
But to begin with,
we only deploy one pod
because we don't want all users
to go to that service.
We use the same label though,
a label called app
with its value set to reviews.
And, as such,
the same service picks up the new pod,
part of the new deployment.
Now, the service has four endpoints.
As such, 75% of traffic
now goes to version 1,
and 25% goes to v2.
Now with the third version of reviews,
we deploy a new reviews application.
This too has a single replica
and the same labels.
So the service now has a new pod
added as an endpoint.
And now with a new pod,
60% of traffic is routed to v1,
20% to v2,
and 20% to v3.
So, let's say, for instance,
we have identified v3,
the one with the colored star,
to be the winner as users
like that the most.
So, we decide to route
all traffic to that version.
For this,
we first scale up the replicas
of v3 to v3.
So now we have an equal amount
of traffic going to v1 and v3.
We then scale down the replicas
on v1 and v2,
and now we have
100% of traffic to v3.
We now have successfully run
an A/B test
to route traffic to the new versions,
tested and identified
the correct version to use,
and then migrated to the new version
of RevueService, all live,
and without any downtime
or disruption to service.
This whole process is the native Kubernetes
way of performing canary tests
and controlling traffic
between different versions of services.
However, this has several challenges.
Earlier, we had 100% of traffic
going to v1,
and when v2 was deployed,
we had 75% going to v1
and 25% going to v2.
What if we need more granularity
in distributing traffic
between versions?
For example, what if we wanted
to send just 1% of traffic
to v2,
so that the distribution is 99%
to v1 and just 1%
to v2?
Since there are only 4 pods,
and since the Kubernetes service
distributes traffic across
all of them equally,
the distribution can only be
75% and 25%,
not anything else.
The only way to change the distribution
percentage is to play around
with the number of pods available
in different services.
So that's a limitation.
With Istio and Virtual Services,
we can now create a Virtual Service
instead of a service,
and we will call it reviews.
We then define two destination rules
for traffic distribution,
subset v1 and v2.
And we set a weight for each.
99% for one,
and 1% for the other.
Now, we can route 99% of traffic
to one service,
and 1% to the other.
Even if the reviews v2 service
had 3 or more pods,
the traffic distribution would still be
99% to v1,
and 1% to v2.
The number of instances now
has nothing to do with the traffic
distribution, and we can easily
control that through the
Virtual Service configuration.
Now, you must be wondering
what a subset is,
and how it is configured.
Well, hold on to that thought.
For now, just think of it as a way
of grouping multiple objects together
using a label.
Like how a regular Kubernetes service is.
But not exactly.
We will get to that in the upcoming sections.